Warm greetings, friends. Warm greetings. If everyone could please, we'd just reconnect
to our motivation, bring a deep sense of gratitude and kind of refreshed, present joyfulness
to being able to come together and reflect on the teachings of the Buddha and Guru Rinpoche
and the lineage masters and then to put them into practice. So bring up that really deep
heartfelt kind of sense of appreciation for the opportunity. And then in addition to that,
I really have this motivation that all the benefit that comes from doing that, connecting
to these teachings and applying them in our lives, that the benefit really immediately
benefits and goes out to all beings everywhere, every single one, and provides them with whatever
they need to be happy, and then ultimately whatever they need to be completely free and
achieve enlightenment. So awaken that bodhicitta view, actual experience, and then thirdly,
this pure view of Vajrayana to see that everything is naturally divine. All the forms, sounds,
and thoughts, emotions, movements of mind, they're all naturally, just as they are, fine,
natural, pure. So trying to see this view, kind of bring up that, activate that kind
of sense of pure view in our minds right now. And with this renunciation, bodhicitta and
pure view kind of really take a moment to enliven that.
Thank you. It's always a really humbling experience to get to be here and say something
about Dharma. It's like such a tremendous, really big responsibility. And I'm always
just in way over my head, because the Dharma is so vast and profound. So that's just the
reality of it. And then kind of fulfilling the request. I've come to Rumba Chay to kind
of be here for these ongoing Dudham Taresananda practices, with kind of little introductory
remarks. So kind of trying to fulfill that to my best capabilities, and just kind of,
yeah, with really good intentions. So trying to reactivate that myself. And then each time
it's kind of seen, I kind of feel this kind of pressure of it, like what to offer this
time, what's going to be really helpful. And that's always, I don't know, kind of, I take
that kind of question seriously for myself. So I didn't really know this time. It's kind
of a little difficult. And I kind of honed in on something, but I'm kind of always trying
to think in my mind, like what could really be helpful? Like amidst all the teachings that
these great noble beings have taught, and all these books, all these opportunities we
have to connect to the Dharma, like what, you know, what's, what would be helpful now? And
so it kind of becomes a question of what supports are there that for people beginning on the
path, continuing on the path, like what, what's been helpful for me? Because yeah, it's involved.
To open the heart is really involved, and to be vulnerable and available and sensitive
and humble, and to try to be receptive and responsive to circumstances, to people, as
we all go through our ups and downs and have different moods and inspirations and difficulties
come up. You know, it's, what's helpful, what serves is a really big bodhisattva question.
And something that I've connected with for years, just in this small little, you know,
baby steps I've taken on the path, is these four alliances. So that's kind of the main
topic I thought to just kind of reflect on a little bit in our brief time together is
the four alliances taught by the Buddha. And these are essential foundational teachings
honored and held, maintained from the foundational Buddhism all the way up through Tibetan Buddhism
.
And the Buddha said to have taught this in the Sutra of inexhaustible knowledge, these
four alliances. And they're kind of to some degree just today is like to think of all
the great variety and the richness that the Buddha's teachings offer, 84,000 teachings
and the millions of tantras like kind of to have some keys that will help unlock or kind
of distill some essential fundamental kind of first principles or like really key points
that amidst all the variety to always, we can always come back to and rely on and trust
in that they were, they're reliable. So here, this topic is the four alliances. And just
kind of a lot of this talk kind of in just this idea that I'm referring to comes from
Venerable Kempa Ramachas. They have, they discussed this in many of their books, especially in
their Shedra series, the Rong Tong and Shen Tong View book, they talk about the four alliances,
then also in their outer tantras, the outer tantra commentary, opening the wisdom, opening
the door to the outer tantras, as well as the Giyugarbha books. So there's a lot of
teachings on the four alliances and what these are and our own teachers, Venerable Kempa
Ramachas have taught them, they've emphasized the importance of these teachings quite a
lot. And so there's, this is just a little peeking into a door that goes into a vast
terrain and territory. So that's well worth kind of going into further. We're just kind
of a little peeking through into that door today. And so the first reliance is don't rely
on the teacher, rely on the teachings. The second reliance, the second reliance is don't
rely on the words, rely on the meaning. The third reliance is don't rely on the provisional
meaning or the interpretable meaning, but rely on the definitive meaning. And then fourthly,
the fourth reliance is don't rely on conceptual mind, but rely on wisdom awareness. So these
are the four alliances that the Buddha taught us. What is worthy of our trust of reliance?
Don't rely on the teacher, but the teachings. Don't rely on the words, but their meaning.
Not the provisional meaning, but the definitive meaning. And not our conceptual mind, our
dualistic kind of mind, but our wisdom, wisdom awareness. These are the four alliances. Then
I find this is like a way to go deeper and deeper into the teachings and to let ourselves
absorb these teachings more richly, more thoroughly. So this first reliance, don't rely on the
teacher, but the teachings. Then here, this is like such a big teaching that the Buddha
taught that to not take, to not trust in the validity of something just because a famous
person said it or a charismatic person or they're beautiful or popular, renowned, alleged
expert or it's like a very popular opinion, but look for yourself. Really test it. Test
the validity, not just based on someone who has a position of authority or a position
of power, but really look for yourself. That this is so important to kind of, as Buddhists,
to go beyond the idea that, you know, we just kind of always put blind faith in someone
else and just say yes. That the Buddha was so clear that this is not how the path of
enlightenment or liberation happens. We really have to do this process of awakening ourselves.
Our own mind has to wake up. Our own heart has to open up. And so we really fully have
to engage this process. And while having great guides like the Buddha is so important and
can save us so much time and so much wasted time by having a real expert kind of give
us key points to look after, like the Four Reliances, then we really still have to apply
them for ourselves. Just as Buddhists, it's good to emphasize that point and kind of keep
coming back. This has to be a lived experience of one's own self. We're not worshiping it
in anyone. This is not a theistic path. We're relying on other testimony and other advice,
but we're always testing it for ourselves in our own experience and with our own logic.
Trying to use all our faculties to really see for ourselves what's the truth. So what's
the Dharma? So this is the first reliance to put. I'm doing these very quickly. Don't rely
on the teacher, but the teaching. The Dharma is what's principle. Then secondly, don't
just rely on the words of the teaching, but go into the meaning of the words. And here
we have to open up our inquiry. We can't just rely on a literal meaning of words. We can't
just repeat something like a parrot. We can't just give the most obvious. The most obvious
and tangible isn't necessarily the most true. The Buddha is saying there's much more subtle
levels of meaning in the teachings. And we have to keep looking and keep opening ourselves
to those subtler levels of meaning and to see in those more and more subtle ways. Not
as obvious, not as literal. We need to see some of the implicit meaning. And that's a
lot of work to really try to look at a topic, look at teachings from various angles. This
contemplation is really required of us to really reflect things and test them and see
if they're true and see if the opposite is true and really debate the teaching and try
it on for ourselves. That the Buddha is asking us to do that, to really engage the teaching.
Not just as a kind of something we just believe in, like oh blind faith to a text now. Not
a teacher, but a text. Just believe in the text. The Buddha said no, there's so many
levels of meaning to these texts. And we have to really get more of a faculty for going
deeper into the meaning. And then we need to have that question of like how can I access
deeper levels of meaning and how can I assess them? The validity of those deeper levels.
It's not enough just to go deeper. We have to still make sense of it. It's not enough
to see subtler patterns. We have to actually make sense of them. How do I interpret these
subtler patterns? And then so that leads us to the third reliance. Don't rely on just
the provisional meaning, but rely on the definitive meaning. This is a big topic in Buddhism.
What does provisional mean? Or interpretable? It basically, it means that the Buddha was
like the Buddha wasn't saying it the way enlightened beings see things. They were kind of dumbing
it down a little bit. Or kind of making it a little more digestible. Zogg-Sarkhan Surimache
sometimes jokingly called these like Cinderella stories. The Buddha told us stories that fit
more easily with our habitual expectations and our habits. So that it would be easier
for us to digest them. These truths, the provisional truths, it only is true up to a certain point.
It's partially true. And once we get to that point, then that edge of the context where
it's relevant, that truth, then all of a sudden that truth becomes, we see a limit of the
truth, a limit of a position. And this is very much goes and is related to middle way
Midyamaka teachings. On the relative level, any position, any standpoint, any boundary
we make, there's something that it leaves out. It always has an opposite. It always
omits. And in that omission is a distortion. We need to make healthy boundaries. We need
to have healthy definitions, really clear minded thinking and very kind of grounded
feeling. But any time we orient in a certain way, there's some way we're not orienting.
So we're leaving something out or we're highlighting one part at the expense of another. It's just
how relative reality works. It's how duality mind functions. And so all these are provisional.
That's provisional. Only goes so far. A truth that only is true to an extent. Contextually
true. So it's context bound truth. And so then definitive truth would be true in all
cases. Or true that the way an enlightened fully realized being experiences things unmistakably,
they're not kind of, they're not having to like present it in a way that suits sentient
beings' needs and views and dispositions. They're just saying the truth as it is unmistakably,
the way it's experienced from an awakened enlightened perspective. This is definitive
teaching. So in this level of the Reliances, not the provisional meaning but the definitive
one, here we can see that assumed in this, there's a spectrum of relative truths. And
relative reality, everything is partially true. But there is a sequence of partial truths
that get less and less partially true or more and more fully true until they're definitive.
So this is a big point. That it's saying that not all opinions are equal. That what's helpful,
what's true is always context bound. But certain truths are more true than others. They include
more truth. They have a bigger, more inclusive context. They cover, they include more evidence.
They're more well tested. There's more testimony. There's better data. There's a spectrum of
truths. This is all on relative level. And eventually that leads us into definitive truth.
So here it's positing, there is a definitive truth, the way that an unmistaken way of experiencing
reality. And this leads us to the fourth reliance. Rely on wisdom awareness, not on conceptual
mind. Saying the only way to experience definitive truth is through wisdom, prajna, wisdom
awareness.
Not just duality, conceptual mind. Intellectual argumentation. Kind of relative positions
of any kind. But to see the unchanging nature of wisdom awareness. That's the fourth reliance.
To use our own wisdom as the way we engage all of our experience. That eventually that's
where the path is leading us. We're relying on our wisdom from moment to moment to moment
to moment. Not our kind of fabricated duality mind that always has opinions and preferences
and just by nature excludes things. But our wisdom. The wisdom to see beyond this exclusionary
way of experiencing things. Wisdom. So that again is a very big topic to distinguish between
Sam and Rigpa. Our conceptual mind and non-conceptual wisdom. Such a big topic. But this is where
the path is leading us. To wisdom. Our own wisdom. Showing us our own wisdom. Our own
open mind. And here we can see that the Buddha who taught this some 2,600 years ago was so
ahead of his time. He's still ahead of our times. He's so amazingly, radically awakened.
He's so far beyond. That we all have this wisdom awareness. It can see definitive truth.
It can see relative truth with all of its variety and distinctions so precisely and
so clearly. It can see the literal truth and it can see all the different types of authorities.
All the different people to believe in. The different types of testimonies. The Buddha
can see all of this and he's giving us a path step by step with what we can rely on so that
we can eventually come down to really like seeing for ourselves the way reality is. And
not at the exclusion of our relationships but by using them. By using what we experience.
To go deeper. To open up more. To absorb more. So these are the four alliances taught by
the extraordinary, gracious, so kind, compassionately wise Buddha. It's been upheld in all the
traditions
of Buddhism. These foundational teachings in all of Sutra Mahayana and Tantra Mahayana.
And then here we get into this next kind of set or series of kind of clear distinctions
when we look at this third reliance of provisional and definitive. Not provisional truth but
definitive and this is something I just wanted to quickly mention. It's like such a big doorway
or entry into like such a vast amazingly special landscape of Vajrayana. And that's what's
talked about often by these great masters including Venerable Kambaramaches. The six
limits and the four codes. These are very renowned Vajrayana teachings. They're ways
of like assessing the meaning of the Vajrayana pit instructions accurately. And like opening
the meaning more and more vastly, more deeply. So that our practice and our path can be more
thorough. The four codes, the six limits. Venerable Kambaramaches, they mention these
in almost each of their Shirdra books. And it's just like a little key way that can like
kind of locate, it can locate an experience or a view a little more kind of like fully
so that we can unpack the meaning and like you utilize it a little more easily. So these
are like keys. They're not like more numerical number things just to remember and get more
confused by. They're actually like these distilled essential kind of keys that unlock or open
the kind of deeper meanings of all these teachings. And then specifically this is related to Vajray
ana
or the Tantra in Buddhism. And first the four codes. This also was taught by His Holiness
the Dalai Lama and a book of his and published in 1995 called World of Tibetan Buddhism,
an overview of its philosophy and practice. That's by His Holiness the Dalai Lama. So
this is some 26 years ago in English. These teachings on four codes and six limits are
not new. Buddha taught them a long time ago. They've been published in English language
for English speakers for quite some time now. So this is all readily available to look more
into if we want to. And so these four codes to begin with as like said to be the word
meaning is the first. And then the second is a general meaning. The third is the hidden
meaning. And the fourth is the ultimate meaning. And these are levels of meaning in the Tantras.
The word meaning, general meaning, hidden meaning, ultimate meaning. We can apply this
to nundra practice. We can apply this to any Tibetan Buddha's teaching. And here, Kambara
Rinpoche is in two of their books on the great noble lady Tara. Smile of Sun and Moon and
Tara's Enlightened Activity. They go through these four codes and six limits very extensively.
And specifically in these two Tara books, the whole book is designed or each of these
books, they're both designed around these four codes. The four levels of meaning of
the 21 praises of Tara. Word meaning, general, hidden, and ultimate. That's what each of
the chapters, it breaks into these four ways of understanding, unpacking, unlocking, accessing
the meaning of the teachings in our own experience. So this is a very renowned way to understand
teachings. And the word meaning is just a literal meaning. What do the words specifically
say? It's very zoomed in and very specific. And then the second, and I'm just going through
this really quickly, the second meaning is a general meaning and takes a much broader
view of the specific text that we're looking at, the fifth instruction. Where does it fit
in all the range of the Buddha's teachings? What's the general theme of the teaching?
Not just the words or the phrase or the exact pinpoint essence, but like kind of the broader
stroke more bird's eye view meaning. And then thirdly, the hidden meaning. This is now it
gets again into these different levels or layers of more and more subtle meaning that
come, they correspond to more and more subtle views. When we refine our views, then certain
levels of meaning open up to us and we start seeing them as well. And there's many ways
there's in the Tantras, there's six levels, six yanas of Tantras. Each of them goes into
a more hidden meaning. And then fourthly, the ultimate meaning. And Rinpoche said this
is like the Dzogchen or Mahamudra, these highest, kind of highest unexcelled Tantras, like peak,
the highest view of the ultimate nature. So this is more related to wisdom awareness.
So each pit instruction can be understood in these four ways. And then in Rinpoche's books
is two Tara books, the way they kind of explicitly talking about the four codes is more like
the word meaning is like specifically to the text, according to the outer Tantra view,
the word meaning. And then the general meaning they're saying is more according to Mahayoga
understanding of visualization practice. And then the third, the hidden meaning is the
Anayoga approach of completion stage with characteristics or by holding on to certain
forms. And then fourthly, the ultimate meaning is the Dzogchen completion without characteristics,
not relying on anything provisional, just complete awakened awareness. These are four
codes, four ways that we can just like a basic frame we can use to open deeper and deeper
levels of a teaching in our experience. So it's like another tool we can have to kind
of unlock some of the meaning in our experience of the Tantras to illuminate a little bit.
And then the six limits, going to that, this is also covered in His Holiness's book and
many of Rinpoche's Shadr books too. And then they're similar to kind of what we've been
discussing so far. There's three sets of kind of opposites in a way. The first two limits
are the provisional and definitive meanings. So we've kind of briefly discussed those.
So in the Tantra, what's a provisional meaning? What's a definitive meaning? And then the
next two are the intended meaning and the unintended meaning. So this is kind of like
a little bit more like what was the, you could say the basic intention of offering the teaching
or giving the teaching. And then what is the unintended or the not as easily recognizable
intention of the Buddha saying something or of a Tantra being written in a certain way.
What's a little easier is like a parent with a child. They might give a reason that a child
shouldn't do something. And it's not so much for the reason, but it's for another reason.
They're trying to help the child. The child can't understand and you know that you can't
just only eat ice cream, you know. So they give some other reason. Like if you eat too
much ice cream, you'll just turn into a big vat of ice cream. There's all different ways
where the Buddha could teach one thing like recite a mani mantra once and you'll purify
all these countless eons, so many eons of negative karma. Then what there's different
levels kind of we kind of locate that. It's a provisional teaching or definitive and it's
provisional. Is it true in what way at what level? So this is kind of what this is helping
us unpack a little bit. We have to ask ourselves these questions. And then the third set is
again we've discussed before the third set of the six limits is literal and non-literal.
The literal and non-literal meanings. So we have the provisional and definitive, the intended
and unintended, and the literal and the non-literal. So this is all to say that the tantras are
very sophisticated system and Buddhism in general with the four alliances. If we just
think that the Buddha is just giving some blind faith belief, you know, this is so thoroughly
refuted by the Buddha's actual teachings. We look at these four alliances, four codes,
six limits. We can clearly see in the Buddha's own words and all that have been just repeated
so much for centuries by these masters. This is not the way Buddhism works. Which is a
big point. Even unpacking these four codes and six limits, there's different ways to
do it. It's a provisional teaching too. Buddha is such a genius. Okay, so in the Guyagarbha
Tantra, which Rinpoche is teaching in their Outer Tantra book, they unpack the six limits
in totally different way and they say this is one of the other really renowned ways of
understanding the six limits. Here I'm just looking at notes, you know. Say in the Guyagarbha
Tantra, the first limit is the view, the union of relative and absolute truths. We have to
have that view. That's the first. And here the Rinpoche say that the word limit, it's
not, it's ta, t-h-a, it's not translated as limit, it's translated as foundation or necessity
or base. What are the six foundations? First foundation is the unmistaken view of the union
of relative and absolute truth. That's a one foundation. We have to have to correctly understand
the Tantras. This is a different way to unpack the six limits. The second one is conduct.
We have to apply conduct, behavior that opens or like really emphasizes or makes even more
brilliant that same view. Our conduct has to illuminate our view and expand it. Then
thirdly we follow Samayas and commitments properly. That's the third limit, the third
foundation or necessity. The fourth is we have to go step by step receiving the appropriate
empowerments in the right sequence and unlocking the meaning of the teaching thoroughly, step
by step in order to properly understand and experience the Tantras. And fifth, concentration
are our samadhi. Basically this Rimbaches are saying all of this process has to be facilitated
through our meditation practice. We can't access these deeper meanings just on an intellectual
level alone. We have to perform it. We have to transform our way of understanding. We
have to refine our awareness and that happens through meditation, not just study alone or
contemplation. We have to put it into practice. That's the only way these deeper meanings are
going to unlock in our experience in a reliable steady way where they can be really changed
the way we are and not just be some flash experience we had once and then it's gone.
And then the sixth limit is it has to follow the lineage pit instructions to correctly
understand and absorb to access the meaning of the Tantras. It has to be authentic lineage
and it has to go through authentic lineage pit instructions. These are the six foundations
to correctly understand the Tantras. View, conduct, follow the Samayas, proceed gradually
step by step in our experience to open up the awakening with meditation according to
the lineage pit instructions. It's the only correct way to understand the Tantras taught
by the Buddha. Then there's even a third way to understand the six limits. Here I'm throwing
something out just to appreciate the beauty of the Buddha's teachings. This can all be
applied to the nundra, how we understand our nundra practice. The third way to understand
the six limits, which Kambhara Rinpoche says, is another very renowned way of understanding
them and they cover it extensively in the outer Tantras, their outer Tantra Shirdarpok.
The first is like the first thing we have to rely on of the six limits. The first one
is instruction manuals, actual guide books, Tantric guide books by qualified teachers.
So then how do we learn the instruction manual? We have to follow a qualified guru. That's
the second limit. Then how does a lama become qualified? They have to have the pit instructions.
Not just the intellectual idea of them, and then not just a hunch. They have to be upholding
and preserving those instructions received in a living lineage. Then fourthly, to some
degree, they have to have actualized or directly experienced the meaning of the pit instructions
in their own experience through their own practice. This is a foundation to understand
the Tantras. Then fifthly, that realization, that guide that we're relying on, that realization
has to come through practice. It has to be practiced in order for the realization to
happen. The transformation can't be just thought about. It has to be undergone. And then finally,
the result, or it comes down to like the result of enlightenment, that they received these
pit instructions themselves from their qualified teacher in an uncorrupted, authentic lineage
that's preserved the pit instructions in these instruction manuals, and they put it into
practice themselves, and got some degree of realization, and they kept practicing it.
And then they became reliable guides for other people, for other beings like myself, just
sentient beings, to actually learn to access the meaning of something as so vastly profound
and complex and beautiful and simple as a dudrum terra sarnundra. These great masters
have done all that work. And we have ways of making sense of why we should rely on a
teacher. When the four reliances, the outer level of the teachings, the Buddha said, don't
rely on the teacher, rely on the teaching. And as we keep applying that and testing for
ourselves, and we get into more and more subtle territory, and our mind gets more and more
refined, and the extent of cause and effect becomes more and more on our radar, the fast
mystery of cause and effect.
As the deeper we get, the more we need a teacher, the more we need a guide, and the more capable
we are of discerning the guidance, and really correctly locating the guidance, and asking
for help when we need help. So here the teachings say, really begin with being very skeptical.
Look for yourself. Use logic. Use inference. Look at the scriptures. Look at what all these
masters have said. And as our practice deepens and our kind of intellectual intelligence
gets more kind of clarified, we have to go beyond logic. We have to go beyond kind of
conceptual mind, especially if we get into things like tantra, where the first limit
is to rely on a view, unmistaken view of the union of relative and absolute truth. And
we need a teacher to receive these instructions, and we need to be able to discern teachers,
and we need to be able to discern our own qualities as a student. And we have to be
humble, honest with ourselves about that, and willing to receive feedback. And that's
a very involved process, so we need to really bring the A game. We need to bring everything
that we can from our own side, and be receptive, and curious, and keep learning, but also
courageous,
and have really healthy kind of abilities to distinguish and define. And it comes down
to it every time we have to actually apply them to our own minds, our own hearts. We
have to live it. The Dharma has to be lived. That's why if we look at how these kind of
like four alliances unfold, the four codes, the six limits, we can see how people can
understand, oh, Buddhism is a religion. Then it goes deeper and becomes a philosophy. Then
it goes deeper and it becomes a way of life. Then it goes deeper and it becomes an uninterrupted
living experience of how wisdom beings, like how sage-like beings experience all of reality
from moment to moment, and all the different ways that it can be experienced, the vast
spectrum of cause and effect, and the vast spectrum of views that beings can take. This
is all Buddhism. And so I wanted to just take a little time, not to just throw out a lot
of different numerical systems, but to just also honor, to pause and in a way honor, like
the richness of the Buddhist teachings. And not just the richness, but the Buddha gave
us these methods, these codes, these keys to unlock the meaning more deeply in ourselves
and our experience. The Buddha gave us all these systems of inquiry, but we have to apply
them ourselves. And it's such a wonderful opportunity we have. It's such a wonderful
opportunity that I come across things like this and teachings by Kemba Ramache's and
the Buddha, and just so much nuance. It's just been there all along and it's been preserved.
If we get tired of the same old, same old, back and forth, black and white, kind of like
brutal wrestling that's been kind of, you know, somehow become like a norm, the norm
of like how people are supposed to be, then we can look to things like Buddhism, how such
a rich, rich living tradition that goes so much deeper than just saw this either/or kind
of thinking. And it really asks us to like bring our full Buddha nature out from hiding,
you know, and to reveal it for our own benefit and the benefit of others, both now and long
into the future. I'm so just utterly amazed every time by the Buddha's teachings. They
just go so deep and it's so open and then it leads to just such naturalness. Not anything
just overly complicated for its own sake, but it's just more helpful so we can kind
of zoom in and be with each other, kind of tune into each other more skillfully and simply
and just write what's right. At that time, with someone we're with, then we can kind
of zoom out and flexibly engage our experience as it keeps changing in a different way that's
really context sensitive and really helpful. So I hope some of this is helpful, at least
is like little doorways to peek into these really deep, profound teachings. Of course,
there's so much more to say about these things and it would be, it's just a very extensive
big topic. The tantras in general, of course, but then also just these methods of unlocking
their utter brilliance. So thanks so much. Appreciate the time. Really? And then we'll
go into the practice of the Dijim Terasarnandro. Thanks so much. Thank you. Thank you so much.
Thank you all so much. I hope it was helpful just to have a little quick kind of turbo
summary of topics that are super profound, four reliances, four codes, six limits, kind
of what all these are orienting towards is that the teachings as we kind of keep working
with them and keep kind of absorbing them and becoming receptive to the Dharma, that
it deepens and we deepen. And our relationship to our guide, our guru and our community,
it all deepens. And so this is really, hopefully it's like kind of a, there are kind of a few
little kind of ways of seeing that depth and that beauty in the teachings and ourselves
and our kind of amongst our qualified teachers can see how just a quick survey of these six
limits is like three different ways of seeing how the teachings go deeper and then how our
self, our experience of our view and our practice and conduct, it all goes deeper and how like
our relationship with a qualified Lama as the six foundations, that deepens and what's
required to actually be in that position to hold that kind of wisdom and transmit it.
That yeah, so hopefully this is kind of a little encouraging of like when the richness
of the Dharma is so vast and profound, there's a next opening, there's a next step in the
Buddha taught this sequence of steps, not in some kind of rigid kind of like heavy handed
way, but just as a natural unfolding, that things become naturally more compassionate
naturally more wise as we keep applying the teachings in our lives. So I hope that was
clear and just a brief little time I took to go over that. So I really genuinely hope
that was helpful.